Experiment – 1: Execute the commands - netstat, nslookup, pathping, 
ping route, tracet, 
Definitions & meanings of terms 
ARP 
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) The Address Resolution Protocol is a layer 2 
protocol used to map MAC addresses to IP addresses. All hosts on a network are 
located by their IP address, but NICs do not have IP addresses, they have MAC 
addresses. ARP is the protocol used to associate the IP address to a MAC address. 
Ipconfig  
Displays all current TCP/IP network configuration values and refreshes Dynamic 
Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) and Domain Name System (DNS) settings. 
Used without parameters, ipconfig displays Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) and 
IPv6 addresses, subnet mask, and default gateway for all adapters. 
hostname 
A host name is a unique name or label assigned to any device that is connected to a 
specific computer network. It facilitates the differentiation of different machines or 
devices connected to the Internet, a network and/or both. 
Netdiag 
The Netdiag command-line diagnostic tool helps to isolate networking and 
connectivity problems by performing a series of tests to determine the state of your 
network client. 
Netstat 
Displays active TCP connections, ports on which the computer is listening, Ethernet 
statistics, the IP routing table, IPv4 statistics (for the IP, ICMP, TCP, and UDP 
protocols), and IPv6 statistics (for the IPv6, ICMPv6, TCP over IPv6, and UDP over 
IPv6 protocols). Used without parameters, this command displays active TCP 
connections. 
Nslookup 
nslookup is the name of a program that lets an Internet server administrator or any 
computer user enter a host name and find out the corresponding IP address or 
domain name system (DNS) record. 
Pathping 
This command sends multiple echo Request messages to each router between a 
source and destination, over a period of time, and then computes results based on the 
packets returned from each router 
Ping route 
Ping is a simple command that can test the reachability of a device on the network. 
Traceroute is a command you use to 'trace' the route that a packet takes when 
traveling to its destination. It's useful for tracing network problems, discovering 
where connections fail, and tracking down latency problems. 
Tracert 
a command-line utility that you can use to trace the path that an Internet Protocol 
(IP) packet takes to its destination 
Experiment – 2: Study of different types of network cables. 
Network cables 
In a computer network, to connect two or more computers or networking devices 
network cables are used. These cables are responsible for data transfer and also 
the propagation of signals for telecommunication.  
1. Coaxial Cables: These cables contain a conductor, insulator, braiding, and 
sheath. The sheath covers the braiding, the braiding covers the insulation, and 
the insulation covers the conductor. 
⮚ Sheath - The outer layer of the coaxial cable which protects the cable from 
physical damage. 
⮚ Braided shield - This shield protects signals from external interference and 
noise. This shield is built from the same metal that is used to build the core. 
⮚ Insulation - Insulation protects the core. It also keeps the core separate from 
the braided shield. Since both the core and the braided shield use the same 
metal, without this layer, they will touch each other and create a short-circuit 
in the wire. 
⮚ Conductor - The conductor carries electromagnetic signals.  
Coaxial cables have two types of transmission- 
Baseband Transmission – It is the process of transmitting a single signal at high 
speed. 
Broadband Transmission – It is the process of transmitting a multiple signals 
simultaneously. 
Specifications of coaxial cables 
Type Ohms AWG Conductor Description 
18 
RG-6 75 
Solid copper Used in cable network to provide cable Internet service and 
cable TV over long distances. 
RG-8 50 
10 
Solid copper Used in the earliest computer networks. This cable was 
used as the backbone cable in the bus topology. In Ethernet 
standards, this cable is documented as the 10base5 
Thicknet cable. 
RG
58 
50 
24 
Several thin 
strands 
of 
copper 
This cable is thinner, easier to handle and install than the 
RG-8 cable. This cable was used to connect a system with 
the backbone cable. In Ethernet standards, this cable is 
documented as the 10base2 Thinnet cable. 
RG
59 
75 
20 - 
22 
Solid copper Used in cable networks to provide short-distance service. 
RG - Radio Guide to measure the materials used in shielding and conducting cores. 
Ohm - Impedance is the resistance that controls the signals. It is expressed in the ohms. 
AWG - AWG stands for American Wire Gauge. It is used to measure the size of the core. 
2. Twisted Pair Cables: The twisted-pair cable was primarily developed for 
computer networks. This cable is also known as Ethernet cable. Almost all 
modern LAN computer networks use this cable. This cable consists of color
coded pairs of insulated copper wires. Every two wires are twisted around each 
other to form pair. Usually, there are four pairs. Each pair has one solid color 
and one stripped color wire. Solid colors are blue, brown, green, and orange. In 
stripped color, the solid color is mixed with the white color. 
STP (Shielded twisted-pair) cable - each pair is wrapped with an additional 
metal shield, and all pairs are wrapped in a single outer plastic sheath. 
UTP (Unshielded twisted-pair) cable - all pairs are wrapped in a single plastic 
sheath. 
Categories of twisted-pair cable. 
Catego
 ry/na
 me of  
cable 
Maximu
 m 
support 
speed 
Bandwidth/ 
support 
signals  
rate 
Ethernet 
standard 
Description 
Cat 1 
1Mbps 1MHz 
Not used for data This cable contains only two 
pairs (4 wires). This cable was 
used in the telephone 
network 
for 
transmission. 
Cat 2 
4Mbps 10MHz 
Token Ring 
voice 
This cable and all further 
cables have a minimum of 8 
wires (4 pairs). This cable was 
used in the token-ring 
network. 
Cat 3 
10Mbps 16MHz 
10BASE-T 
Ethernet 
This is the first Ethernet cable 
that was used in LAN 
networks. 
Cat 4 
20Mbps 20MHz 
Token Ring 
This 
cable was used in 
advanced 
Token-ring 
networks. 
Cat 5 100Mbp
 s 
100MHz 100BASE-T 
Ethernet 
This cable was used in 
advanced (fast) LAN networks. 
Cat 5e 1000Mb
 ps 
100MHz 1000BASE-T 
Ethernet 
This cable/category is the 
minimum requirement for all 
modern LAN networks. 
Cat 6 10Gbps 250MHz 10GBASE-T 
Ethernet 
This cable uses a plastic core 
to prevent cross-talk between 
twisted-pair. It also uses a fire
resistant plastic sheath. 
Cat 6a 10Gbps 500MHz 10GBASE-T 
Ethernet 
This cable reduces 
attenuation and cross-talk. 
This cable also potentially 
removes the length limit. This 
is the recommended cable for 
all modern Ethernet LAN 
networks. 
Cat 7 10Gbps 600MHz Not drafted yet This cable sets a base for 
further development. This 
cable uses multiple twisted
pair and shields each pair by 
its plastic sheath. 
● Cat 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 are outdated and not used in any 
modern LAN network. 
● Cat 7 is still a new technology and not commonly 
used. 
● Cat 5e, 6, 6a are the commonly used twisted-pair 
cables. 
 
3. Fiber Optics Cables: This cable consists of a core, cladding, buffer, and jacket. 
The core is made from thin strands of glass or plastic that can carry data over a 
long distance.  
The core is wrapped in the cladding; the cladding is wrapped in the buffer, and the 
buffer is wrapped in the jacket. Core carries the data signals in the form of light. 
⮚ Cladding reflects light back to the core. 
⮚ Buffer protects the light from leaking. 
⮚ The jacket protects the cable from physical damage. 
Fiber optic cable is completely immune to EMI and RFI. This cable can transmit data 
over a long distance at the highest speed. It can transmit data up to 40 kilometers 
at the speed of 100Gbps. Fiber optic uses light to send data. It reflects light from 
one endpoint to another. 
Step Index Fiber – consists of a core surrounded by the cladding which has a 
single uniform index of refraction. 
Graded Index Fiber - The refractive index of the optical fiber decreases as 
the radial distance from the fiber axis increases. 
Plastic Optical Fibers – Polyymethylmethacrylate is used as a core material 
for the transmission of light. 
Glass fibers – consists of fine glass fibers. 
Single mode fiber – used for long-distance transmission of signals. 
Multimode – use for short distance transmission of signals. ---------------------------- 
Experiment – 3: Practically implement the cross-wired cable and 
straight wired cable using crimp tool. 
Components: RJ-45 connector, Climping Tool, Twisted pair Cable  
Procedure:  
Step – 1: Start by stripping off about 2 inches of the plastic jacket off the end of 
the cable. Be very careful at this point, as to not nick or cut into the wires, which 
are inside. Doing so could alter the characteristics of your cable, or even worse 
render is useless. Check the wires, one more time for nicks or cuts. If there are 
any, just whack the whole end off, and start over. 
Step – 2:  Spread the wires apart, Category 5 cable must only have 1/2 of an inch 
of 'untwisted' wire at the end; otherwise it will be 'out of spec'. At this point, you 
obviously have ALOT more than 1/2 of an inch of un-twisted wire.  
Step – 3:  You have 2 end jacks, which must be installed on your cable. If you are 
using a pre-made cable, with one of the ends whacked off, you only have one end 
to install - the crossed over end.  
Below are two diagrams, which show how you need to arrange the cables for 
each type of cable end. Decide at this point which end you are making and 
examine the associated picture below.  
Diagram shows you how to prepare Cross wired connection 
Diagram shows you how to prepare straight through wired connection 
You Tube reference for Practical Session I Cross wired cable and straight through cable using 
clamping tool:  https://youtu.be/E5i8kRJXLTw 
Experiment – 4: Study of network IP address configuration 
(Classification of address, static and dynamic address) 
An IP address is a numerical label assigned to the devices connected to a computer 
network that uses the IP for communication. IP address act as an identifier for a 
specific machine on a particular network. It also helps you to develop a virtual 
connection between a destination and a source. 
IP address Full Form:  Internet Protocol address 
Classification of IP Address 
TCP/IP defines five classes of IP addresses: Class A, B, C, D and E. Each class has a 
range of valid IP addresses. 
Static IP address - it is also known as fixed or dedicated IP addresses which donot 
change. Once a device has been assigned a static IP address that number remains 
with the device as its internet identifier until the device is decommissioned or the 
network architecture is modified.  
You can assign these static IP addresses on the device itself—using 
⮚ Windows' network settings on each computer 
⮚ or you can do it at the router level. If you do it through the router, it will likely 
be called a DHCP reservation. 
⮚ DHCP reservations allow you to easily set everything up in one place with all 
your computers left at their default settings.  
⮚ Your computer will ask for an IP address via DHCP, and your router will assign 
it the one you reserved, with your computer being none the wiser. 
You tube link: https://youtu.be/SOGaaGBwzxk 
How to set up a static IP address 
You will need to contact your Internet Services Provider (ISP) for a static IP 
address. Once you receive this, setup is straightforward.  
For Windows 
● Open the settings app on your computer 
● Choose Network and Internet option from the list on the left 
● Select the connection you are using 
● Find the IP assignment manage known networks > properties > IP settings 
● Select edit under IP assignments 
● Select Manual from the options 
● Select IPv4 and toggle to on 
It’s a simple process to switch to a static address, and for businesses and 
individuals with more complicated internet needs, it’s a great decision. 
● Enter the static IP address 
● Enter 24 in the Subnet prefix length field 
● Find your gateway and DNS by typing ipconfig/all into the command 
window 
● Add the gateway information in the field 
● Add the preferred DNS address and, if available, the alternate DNS address 
● Remember to click save when you’re finished 
Dynamic IP address – it is an ever changing dynamic IP address, which isnot 
permanently tied to a device. Dynamic IP address are used for a specific amount 
of time and then returned to an address pool so that other devices can use them. 
Dynamic IP addresses are the most common type of IP address; they are the 
default IP address type provided by internet service providers (ISPs). In addition, 
dynamic IP addresses are ideal for everyday internet users because they are easy 
to manage and don't require users to go through any additional setup or network 
configuration. An organization or home network should nearly always use a 
dynamic IP address.  
Experiment – 5: Study of network devices (switch, Router, Hub, 
Bridge) 
Network Devices: Physical devices that allow hardware on a computer network to 
communicate and interact with one another.  
Hub: An Ethernet hub, active hub, network hub, repeater hub, hub or concentrator 
is a device for connecting multiple twisted pair or fiber optic Ethernet devices 
together and making them act as a single network segment. Hubs work at the 
physical layer (layer 1) of the OSI model. The device is a form of multiport repeater. 
Repeater hubs also participate in collision detection, forwarding a jam signal to all 
ports if it detects a collision. 
Switch: A network switch or switching hub is a computer networking device that 
connects network segments. The term commonly refers to a network bridge that 
processes and routes data at the data link layer (layer 2) of the OSI model. Switches 
that additionally process data at the network layer (layer 3 and above) are often 
referred to as Layer 3 switches or multilayer switches.  
Bridge: A network bridge connects multiple network segments at the data link layer 
(Layer 2) of the OSI model. In Ethernet networks, the term bridge formally means a 
device that behaves according to the IEEE 802.1D standard. A bridge and switch are 
very much alike; a switch being a bridge with numerous ports. Switch or Layer 2 
switch is often used interchangeably with bridge.Bridges can analyze incoming data 
packets to determine if the bridge is able to send the given packet to another segment 
of the network. 
Router: A router is an electronic device that interconnects two or more computer 
networks, and selectively interchanges packets of data between them. Each data 
packet contains address information that a router can use to determine if the source 
and destination are on the same network, or if the data packet must be transferred 
from one network to another. Where multiple routers are used in a large collection 
of interconnected networks, the routers exchange information about target system 
addresses, so that each router can build up a table showing the preferred paths 
between any two systems on the interconnected networks. 
Gate Way:  In a communications network, a network node equipped for interfacing 
with another network that uses different protocols.  
● A gateway may contain devices such as protocol translators, impedance 
matching devices, rate converters, fault isolators, or signal translators as 
necessary to provide system interoperability. It also requires the 
establishment of mutually acceptable administrative procedures between 
both networks.  
● A protocol translation/mapping gateway interconnects networks with 
different network protocol technologies by performing the required protocol 
conversions. 
Experiment – 6: Share the folder in a system and access the files of 
that folder from other system using IP address. 
Windows 10 
⮚ Set Up File Sharing on a Windows PC 
⮚ Share File or Folder using "Give access to" Context Menu 
⮚ Stop Sharing File or Folder using "Give access to" Context Menu 
⮚ Share File or Folder using Share tab in File Explorer 
⮚ Stop Sharing File or Folder using Share tab in File Explorer 
⮚ Share Folder using Sharing Properties 
⮚ Share Folder or Drive using Advanced Sharing 
⮚ Stop Sharing Folder or Drive using Advanced Sharing 
⮚ Share Folder or Drive using Shared Folder Wizard 
⮚ Stop Sharing Folder or Drive using Shared Folders MMC Snap-in


PART – B 
Practical – 1: Configure and connect the computer in LAN. 
There are two ways to configure and connect the computers in LAN depending on 
Operating SYSTEM, they are 
1. Using wired connection 
2. Using wireless connection 
Procedure: On the host computer 
Step -1:  Log on to the host computer as Administrator or as Owner. 
Step -2:  Click Start, and then click Control Panel.  
Step -3:  Click Network and Internet Connections. 
Step -4:  Click Network Connections.  
Step -5:  Right-click the connection that you use to connect to the Internet.  
Step -6:  Click Properties.  
Step -7:  Click the Advanced tab.  
Step -8: Under Internet Connection Sharing, select the Allow other network 
users to connect    through this computer's Internet connection check 
box. 
Step -9: If you are sharing a dial-up Internet connection, select the Establish 
a dial-up connection whenever a computer on my network attempts 
to access the Internet check box if you want to permit your computer 
to automatically connect to the Internet 
Step -10: Click OK. You receive the following message:  
When Internet Connection Sharing is enabled, your LAN adapter will 
be set to use IP address 192.168.0.1. Your computer may lose 
connectivity with other computers on your network. If these other 
computers have static IP addresses, it is a good idea to set them to 
obtain their IP addresses automatically. Are you sure you want to 
enable Internet Connection Sharing? 
Step -10: Click Yes.  
The connection to the Internet is shared to other computers on the local area 
network (LAN). 
The network adapter that is connected to the LAN is configured with a static 
IP address of 192.168.0.1 and a subnet mask of 255.255.255.0 
On the client computer  
To connect to the Internet by using the shared connection, you must confirm 
the LAN adapter IP configuration, and then configure the client computer.                                                    
Step – 1: Log on to the client computer as Administrator or as Owner.  
Step – 2:  Click Start, and then click Control Panel. 
Step – 3: Click Network and Internet Connections.  
Step – 4:  Click Network Connections.  
Step – 5 Right-click Local Area Connection and then click Properties.  
Step – 6: Click the General tab, click Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) in the 
connection uses the following items list, and then click Properties.  
Step – 7: In the Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) Properties dialog box, click 
Obtain an IP address automatically (if it is not already selected), and 
then click OK. Note: You can also assign a unique static IP address 
in the range of 192.168.0.2 to 192.168.0.254. you can assign the 
following static IP address, subnet mask, and default gateway:  
⮚ IP Address: 192.168.31.202 9.  
⮚ Subnet mask: 255.255.255.0 10.  
⮚ Default gateway: 192.168.31.1 11.  
In the Local Area Connection Properties dialog box and click 
OK.  
Step – 8:  Quit Control Panel. 
Practical – 2: Block the website using “windows Defender Firewall” in 
Windows 10. 
Windows Defender Firewall: helps and protects from unauthorized access. 
Blocking the Websites on a Windows 10 PC with the Hosts File                
Method – 1: 
Step-1: Click on the Start menu and select “Windows Accessories.” 
Step-2: Right-click on Notepad, select “More” followed by “Run as 
administrator.” 
Step-3: When the Notepad opens, select “File” from the toolbar and “Open” 
from the drop-down menu. 
Step-4: Go the “C:\Windows\System32\Drivers\etc” location. 
Step-5: Make sure to select the “All files” option for the files to appear. Then 
open the “host” file. 
Step-6: Scroll to the bottom of the page and click on the last line. Make sure to 
create space. 
Step-7: Enter the URL you want to block. 
Step-8: Go to File and select “Save.” 
Method – 2: 
1. Launch the Control Panel on your computer. 
2. Select “Windows Defender Firewall” followed by “Advanced Settings” on 
the left-side pane. 
3. Right-click on “Outbound Rules” from the menu on the left and select “New 
Rule.” 
4. When a new window pops up, select the “Custom” option followed by 
“Next.” 
5. On the next window, select “All programs” and again select “Next.” 
6. Select ” These IP addresses ” option under “Which remote IP addresses does 
this rule apply to?” 
7. Click on “Add” and enter the IP addresses you want to block. Then select 
“Next.” 
8. Make sure to choose the “Block the connection” option and click on “Next.” 
9. Choose whether the rule applies to Domain, Private, or Public. You can also 
select all three. 
10. Select “Next,” add a name or description for this rule, and select “Finish” to 
complete the action. 
The process is straightforward, and the steps are as follows: 
1. Click on the Start menu and select “Windows Accessories.” 
2. Right-click on Notepad, select “More” followed by “Run as administrator.” 
3. When the Notepad opens, select “File” from the toolbar and “Open” from the 
drop-down menu. 
4. Go the “C:\Windows\System32\Drivers\etc” location. 
5. Make sure to select the “All files” option for the files to appear. Then open the 
“host” file. 
6. Scroll to the bottom of the page and click on the last line. Make sure to create 
space. 
7. Enter the URL you want to block. 
8. Go to File and select “Save.” 
For this to work, you must have permission to access the host file. Also, make 
sure to restart your computer to ensure the website is blocked. 
If the firewall permits access to questionable sites, you can set it up so no one in 
your home, school, or work opens it either. Here’s how it works: 
11. Launch the Control Panel on your computer. 
12. Select “Windows Defender Firewall” followed by “Advanced Settings” on the left
side pane. 
13. Right-click on “Outbound Rules” from the menu on the left and select “New 
Rule.” 
14. When a new window pops up, select the “Custom” option followed by “Next.” 
15. On the next window, select “All programs” and again select “Next.” 
16. Select the ” These IP addresses ” option under “Which remote IP addresses does 
this rule apply to?” 
17. Click on “Add” and enter the IP addresses you want to block. Then select “Next.” 
18. Make sure to choose the “Block the connection” option and click on “Next.” 
19. Choose whether the rule applies to Domain, Private, or Public. You can also select 
all three. 
20. Select “Next,” add a name or description for this rule, and select “Finish” to 
complete the action. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Practical – 3: Configuration the wifi hotspot, and connect other 
devices (mobile/laptop). 
1. PC as a mobile hotspot 
Turn your Windows 10 PC into a mobile hotspot by sharing your Internet 
connection with other devices over Wi-Fi. You can share a Wi-Fi, Ethernet, 
or cellular data connection. If your PC has a cellular data connection and you 
share it, it will use data from your data plan. 
1. Select Start , then select Settings  > Network & Internet > Mobile hotspot. 
2. For Share my Internet connection from, choose the Internet connection 
you want to share. 
3. If desired, select Edit > enter a new network name and password > Save. 
4. Turn on Share my Internet connection with other devices. 
5. To connect on the other device, go to the Wi-Fi settings on that device, 
find your network name, select it, enter the password, and then connect. 
2. Working with mobile hotspot 
Activate Mobile Hotspot 
A Mobile Hotspot allows you to share your phone's mobile data connection with 
other devices. Follow the steps below to enable a Mobile Hotspot to share your 
internet connection with other devices. 
Step 1. Launch the Settings app, and then select Connections. 
Step 2. Tap Mobile Hotspot and Tethering. 
Step 3. Tap the switch next to Mobile Hotspot to activate. The Mobile 
Hotspot icon appears on the status bar. 
Step3. On the other device’s screen, search for and select your phone from the 
Wi-Fi networks list. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Practical – 3: Configuration of VLAN using Packet Tracer/GNS3. 
Practical – 4: Configuration of VPN using Packet Tracer/GNS3. 
Steps: 
1. configure terminal. Enter global configuration mode. 
2. interface vlan vlan-id. Enter interface configuration mode, and enter the 
VLAN to which the IP information is assigned. ... 
3. ip address { ip-address subnet-mask | dhcp } Configure the IP address. 
4. exit. ... 
5. show interfaces vlan vlan-id. ... 
6. copy running-config startup-config. 
1. In Cisco Packet Tracer, create the network topology as shown below: 
2. Create 2 VLANs on the switch:  VLAN 10 and VLAN 20. You can give them 
custom names. 
Switch#config terminal 
Switch(config)#vlan 10 
Switch(config-vlan)#name SALES 
Switch(config-vlan)#vlan 20 
Switch(config-vlan)#name IT 
3. Assign switch ports  to the VLANs. Remember each VLAN is viewed as separate 
broadcast domain. 
And just before you configure, have in mind that switch ports could be 
either access or trunk. 
● An access port is  assigned to a single VLAN . These ports are configured for switch 
ports that connect to devices with a normal network card, for example a PC in a 
network. 
● A trunk port  on the other hand is a port that can be connected to another switch 
or router. This port can carry traffic of multiple VLANs. 
So in our case, we’ll configure switch interfaces fa 0/1 through fa 
0/4 as access ports to connect to our PCs. Here, interfaces fa 0/1 and fa 0/2 are 
assigned to VLAN 10 while interfaces fa 0/3 and fa 0/4 are assigned to VLAN 20. 
Switch Interface fa0/5 will be configured as  trunk port, as it will be used to carry 
traffic between the two VLANs via the router. 
Switch>enable 
Switch#config terminal 
 
Switch(config)#int fa0/1 
Switch(config-if)#switchport mode access 
Switch(config-if)#switchport access vlan 10 
 
Switch(config-if)#int fa0/2 
Switch(config-if)#switchport mode access 
Switch(config-if)#switchport access vlan 10 
 
Switch(config-if)#int fa0/3 
Switch(config-if)#switchport mode access 
Switch(config-if)#switchport access vlan 20 
 
Switch(config-if)#int fa0/4 
Switch(config-if)#switchport mode access 
Switch(config-if)#switchport access vlan 20 
Worth noting: We could have configured all the above interfaces as access ports 
using interface range command as shown below: 
Switch(config-if)#int range fa0/1-4 
Switch(config-if-range)#switchport mode access 
In the above commands, we have specified an interface range and then 
proceeded to configure all the ports specified as access ports. 
Interface fa0/5 is configured as trunk and will be used to  for inter-VLAN 
communication. 
Switch(config)#int fa 0/5 
Switch(config-if)#switchport mode trunk 
The next thing is to: 
4 . Assign static IP addresses to the four PCs which are located in the separate 
VLANs. PC1  and PC2  fall in VLAN 10  while PC3 and PC4 fall in VLAN 20. 
PC1   IP address 192.168.1.10   Subnet mask 255.255.255.0  Default 
gateway 192.168.1.1 
PC2:  IP address 192.168.1.20  Subnet mask 255.255.255.0  Default 
gateway 192.168.1.1 
PC3: IP address 192.168.2.10    Subnet mask 255.255.255.0  Default 
gateway 192.168.2.1 
PC4: IP address  192.168.2.20  Subnet mask   255.255.255.0  Default 
gateway 192.168.2.1 
And now it’s very clear that we treat a VLAN just like a physical LAN when 
assigning IP addresses. 
At this point let’s try to test connectivity within VLANs and between VLANs 
To test communication between hosts in the same VLAN: 
Ping PC2 from PC1 both in VLAN 10. Ping test should be successful. 
To test connectivity between hosts in different VLANs: 
Ping PC3 in VLAN 20 from PC1 in VLAN 10. Ping  here will definitely fail. Why? 
Because inter-VLAN routing is not yet enabled. Hope you can see how  we’ve 
used VLANs to place the hosts into two  logical networks which can be viewed as 
separate broadcast domains. 
Now, in order to allow the hosts in the two VLANs to communicate, we need to 
do something extra. And you can guess what. We’ll configure the router to 
permit  inter-VLAN communication. Let’s do that right away. 
5. Configure inter-VLAN routing on the router 
We’ll configure the router so that it will enable communication between the two 
vlans via a single physical interface. How is this made possible? We’ll divide the 
single physical interface on the router into logical interfaces (sub interfaces). Each 
sub-interface will then serve as a default gateway for each of the VLANs. This 
scenario is called router on a stick (R.O.A.S) and will allow  the VLANs to 
communicate through the single physical interface. 
Wort noting:  We  can’t  assign an IP address to the router’s physical interface 
that we have subdivided into  logical sub-interfaces. We’ll instead assign IP 
addresses to the sub interfaces. 
So let’s do router configurations: 
Router>enable 
Router#config terminal 
 
Router(config)#int fa0/0 
Router(config-if)#no shutdown 
 
Router(config-if)#int fa0/0.10 
Router(config-subif)#encapsulation dot1q 10 
Router(config-subif)#ip add 192.168.1.1 255.255.255.0 
Router(config-subif)# 
Router(config-subif)#int fa0/0.20 
Router(config-subif)#encapsulation dot1q 20 
Router(config-subif)#ip add 192.168.2.1 255.255.255.0 
As you can notice from above, the routers physical interface fa0/0  was 
subdivided into two sub-interfaces( fa0/0.10 and  fa0/0.20) , which are then 
configured as trunk interfaces and given IP addresses. 
Finally, 
6. Test inter-VLAN connectivity. 
Here we’ll test connectivity between computers in different VLANs . Don’t forget 
that its the router that enables  inter-VLAN routing. 
Ping PC3 in VLAN  20 from PC1 in VLAN 10. If everything is well configured, then 
ping should work perfectly
